>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION:
HONORING THE VICTIMS ON THE 15th
ANNIVERSARY OF THE SEPTEMBER
11TH TERRORIST ATTACKS.
>> I CAN'T BELIEVE IT'S BEEN 15
YEARS.
SOMETIMES IT FEELS LIKE
YESTERDAY, OTHERS AN ETERNITY.
>> Stewart: AND, IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, COPING WITH
THE LONG-TERM HEALTH EFFECTS
FROM WORKING AT GROUND ZERO.
>> NOW I CAN'T DO ANYTHING,
NOTHING AT ALL.
I CAN'T BREATHE.
I KNOW MY LIFE IS CUT SHORT BIG
TIME.
>> Stewart: NEXT ON "PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IT HAPPENED 15 YEARS AGO TODAY--
THE WORST ATTACK ON AMERICAN
SOIL SINCE PEARL HARBOR, WHEN
TERRORISTS HIJACKED FOUR
COMMERCIAL PASSENGER JETS AND
USED THEM AS WEAPONS AGAINST
SYMBOLS OF THE U.S. ECONOMY AND
MILITARY.
TODAY, ON THIS LANDMARK
ANNIVERSARY, AT THREE MEMORIAL
SITES, AMERICA REMEMBERED.
>> Reporter: THE CEREMONY IN NEW
YORK MARKED THE MOMENT WHEN THE
FIRST PLANE HIT THE TRADE
CENTER'S NORTH TOWER.
JERRY D'AMADEO'S FATHER,
VINCENT, WORKED ON THE 103rd
FLOOR FOR THE BROKERAGE FIRM
CANTOR FITZGERALD, WHICH LOST
658 PEOPLE THAT DAY.
>> TODAY, I'M PROUD TO BE HERE
TO MEMORIALIZE MY FATHER.
THIS IS THE PLACE THAT GIVES ME
THE CHANCE TO THINK ABOUT
BEAUTIFUL MEMORIES.
>> Reporter: FAMILY MEMBERS LED
THE READING OF THE NEARLY 3,000
NAMES INSCRIBED ON THE NATIONAL
MEMORIAL TO ALL 9/11 VICTIMS--
OFFICE WORKERS, PLANE
PASSENGERS, EMERGENCY
RESPONDERS, MEMBERS OF THE
MILITARY.
WHEN THE SECOND PLANE HIT THE
SOUTH TOWER 17 MINUTES AFTER THE
FIRST, HOWARD KESTENBAUM WAS
WORKING INSIDE FOR AON
INSURANCE.
HIS WIFE REMEMBERED HIM TODAY.
>> THOSE OF US WHO'VE LOST OUR
LOVED ONES TO VIOLENCE FORM A
KIND OF GROUP.
WE KNOW THE SHOCK AND GRIEF AND
ANGER THAT FOLLOWS, THE
HEARTACHE THAT WON'T HEAL.
>> Reporter: A HALF HOUR AFTER
THE TRADE CENTER ATTACK, 230
MILES SOUTH OF NEW YORK CITY, A
THIRD PLANE HIT THE PENTAGON--
KILLING 59 PEOPLE ON THE PLANE
AND 125 PEOPLE INSIDE THE
BUILDING.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SPOKE TO
SURVIVORS AND VICTIMS' FAMILIES
THERE.
>> EVEN AS YOU'VE MOURNED,
YOU'VE SUMMONED THE STRENGTH TO
CARRY ON.
AND IN YOUR GRIEF AND GRACE YOU
HAVE REMINDED US THAT TOGETHER
THERE IS NOTHING WE AMERICANS
CANNOT OVERCOME.
>> Reporter: AFTER THE TRADE
CENTER'S SOUTH TOWER FELL, FOUR
MINUTES LATER, A FOURTH PLANE
CRASHED IN THE WESTERN
PENNSYLVANIA TOWN OF
SHANSKVILLE.
TODAY, LOVED ONES REMEMBERED THE
BRAVERY OF THE 40 PASSENGERS AND
CREW OF UNITED FLIGHT 93, WHO
FOUGHT BACK AND THWARTED
HIJACKERS' FROM REACHING THE
U.S. CAPITOL IN WASHINGTON.
THE MASSIVE TWIN TOWERS FELL IN
UNDER TWO HOURS.
A STRIKING IMAGE OF TODAY'S
CEREMONY WAS THE TEENAGERS,
READING THE NAMES OF THEIR
PARENTS, PARENTS WHO MISSED OUT
ON THEIR CHILDHOOD.
>> I LOVE YOU, PAPI, AND WE MISS
YOU, AND I KNOW YOU'RE WATCHING
OVER US.
>> DAD, THE WHOLE FAMILY MISSES
YOU.
IT'S BEEN 15 YEARS.
THIS YEAR, I'M APPLYING TO
COLLEGE, AND I KNOW I'LL MAKE
YOU PROUD.
>> Reporter: AFTER HIS BROTHER
WAS KILLED ON 9/11, JOE QUINN
JOINED THE ARMY AND SERVED IN
AFGHANISTAN AND IRAQ.
>> LOOKING BACK, IT WAS HARD TO
GET THROUGH THOSE WEEKS
FOLLOWING 9/11, BUT AN IMPORTANT
PART OF ME MISSES THOSE DAYS,
BECAUSE AS A COUNTRY, WE WERE
NEVER MORE UNITED, WE WERE NEVER
MORE INSPIRED.
I KNOW IN OUR CURRENT POLITICAL
ENVIRONMENT, IT MAY FEEL THAT
WE'RE DIVIDED.
DON'T BELIEVE IT.
>> AFTER SPENDING 90 MINUTES AT
GROUND ZERO, HILLARY CLINTON
LEFT NOT FEELING WELL.
THE DOCTOR SAID SHE WAS
DIAGNOSED WITH PNEUMONIA ON
FRIDAY AND IS ON ANTIBIOTICS.
SHE BECAME OVERHEATED AT THE
9/11 CEREMONY.
THE NOMINEE WAS STUMBLING AS SHE
WENT INTO HER VAN.
SHE WENT TO HER DAUGHTER'S
APARTMENT TO REST AND EMERGED
TWO HOURS LATER WAVING AND
SAYING, "I'M FEELING GREAT."
HER DOCTOR SAID SHE IS
REHYDRATED AND RECOVERING
NICELY.
>> Stewart: 15 YEARS AFTER
9/11, TENS OF THOUSANDS OF MEN
AND WOMEN INVOLVED IN THE
EMERGENCY RESPONSE AND THE
MONTHS-LONG RECOVERY OPERATION
ARE STILL COPING WITH THE
LONG-TERM HEALTH EFFECTS FROM
WORKING AT THE WORLD TRADE
CENTER SITE. IN TONIGHT'S
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, WE LOOK AT
HOW MEDICAL RESEARCH IS STILL
UNCOVERING NEW HEALTH
CONSEQUENCES-- BOTH PHYSICAL AND
MENTAL-- THAT COULD BE DUE TO
EXPOSURE TO TOXIC DUST AND
TRAUMATIC CONDITIONS AT GROUND
ZERO. NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT KARLA MURTHY
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: IN HIS HOME ON LONG
ISLAND, AN HOUR FROM NEW YORK
CITY, KEN GEORGE KEEPS A BOX OF
MEMENTOS FROM HIS TIME AS A
FIRST RESPONDER TO THE SEPTEMBER
11 TERRORIST ATTACK ON THE WORLD
TRADE CENTER.
>> FIRST NIGHT I WAS THERE I WAS
WALKING THERE AND I TOOK
PICTURES.
MY EYES WERE BURNING, MAN THE
SMELL WAS UNBEARABLE.
THAT'S ALL THE ASH, AND IT'S
LIKE PAPERS FLYING IN FRONT OF
YOU THAT YOU CAN ACTUALLY TOUCH.
>> Reporter: IN 2001, GEORGE
WORKED FOR THE NEW YORK CITY
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION,
WHICH SENT HIM TO GROUND ZERO.
HE WEARS SUNGLASSES FOR
SENSITIVITY TO LIGHT.
>> I THOUGHT I WAS GOING TO BE
LIKE BLOCKING TRAFFIC.
FOR THE FIRST COUPLE OF HOURS, I
WAS ON BUCKET BRIGADE, PASSING
BUCKETS AROUND, STUFF LIKE THAT.
>> Reporter: REMOVING DEBRIS?
>> YEAH, DEBRIS, OR WHATEVER WE
FOUND.
I WOUND UP STEPPING ON, I SAY A
TORSO, PART OF A TORSO.
>> Reporter: SO YOU WERE FINDING
BODY PARTS?
>> A LOT.
A LOT OF BODY PARTS.
>> Reporter: GEORGE WORKED 750
HOURS ON SITE, EXPOSED TO
AIRBORNE TOXINS AND DUST, RARELY
WEARING A MASK OVER HIS FACE.
HE DEVELOPED A BAD COUGH, AND
HIS DOCTOR DIAGNOSED HIM WITH
ASTHMA.
>> I NEVER SMOKED, I NEVER HAD
NOTHING, SO HE GAVE ME ALL THESE
ASTHMA MEDICATIONS, AND COUGH
MEDICATIONS.
>> Reporter: WERE YOU THINKING
AT THAT TIME HOW THIS WAS GOING
TO AFFECT YOUR PHYSICAL HEALTH?
>> NO, NEVER THOUGHT THAT ONCE.
>> Reporter: IN THE YEARS AFTER
9/11, GEORGE'S RESPIRATORY
ISSUES WORSENED.
DOCTORS DIAGNOSED HIM WITH
RESTRICTED AIRWAY DISEASE AND
PUT HIM ON DOZENS MORE
MEDICATIONS.
FOR HIS ILLNESSES CONNECTED TO
EXPOSURE AT GROUND ZERO, GEORGE
DOESN'T HAVE TO PAY FOR HIS
CARE.
IT'S COVERED BY THE WORLD TRADE
CENTER HEALTH PROGRAM, WITH MORE
THAN $6 BILLION ALLOCATED
THROUGH 2025.
THE PROGRAM WAS ESTABLISHED IN
2011 BY THE JAMES ZADROGA HEALTH
AND COMPENSATION ACT.
IT'S NAMED AFTER AN N.Y.P.D.
DETECTIVE WHO DIED IN 2006 FROM
RESPIRATORY DISEASE AFTER
WORKING AS A FIRST RESPONDER.
IN DECEMBER, THE LAW WAS
REAUTHORIZED BY CONGRESS FOR 75
YEARS TO COVER THE LIFETIME OF
RESPONDERS.
>> I THINK THEY WERE TRYING TO
SHOW AND THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
WERE TRYING TO SHOW, GRATITUDE
FOR WHAT THESE RESPONDERS DID.
>> Reporter: DR. JOHN HOWARD IS
THE DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTE FOR OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH, KNOWN AS
N.I.O.S.H.
IT ADMINISTERS THE W.T.C. HEALTH
PROGRAM, WHICH PROVIDES CARE FOR
NEARLY 75,000 RESPONDERS,
SURVIVORS, AND RESIDENTS.
IT ALSO DETERMINES WHAT
CONDITIONS ARE CONNECTED TO 9/11
EXPOSURES.
>> WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT THE
AMOUNT OF DUST CONTAINING ALL OF
THESE VARIOUS CARCINOGENS THAT
THESE THOUSANDS OF INDIVIDUALS
BREATHED IT MAKES SCIENTIFIC
SENSE THAT THIS COULD DAMAGE THE
BODY.
>> Reporter: TODAY, AT 52,
GEORGE'S HEALTH ISSUES MAKE IT
DIFFICULT FOR HIM TO LEAVE HOME.
HE RETIRED FROM THE DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION IN 2006.
>> I WORKED AT A BLACKSMITH
SHOP, WELDING SHOP, I RIPPED UP
THE ROADS, I DID EVERYTHING,
EVERYTHING, AND I WAS PERFECT.
NOW I CAN'T DO ANYTHING, NOTHING
AT ALL.
I CAN'T BREATHE.
I KNOW MY LIFE IS CUT SHORT BIG
TIME.
>> Reporter: BUT GEORGE ISN'T
JUST SUFFERING PHYSICALLY.
HE ALSO SUFFERS PSYCHOLOGICALLY
FROM WORKING ON A SITE WHERE
NEARLY 3,000 PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
HE WAS DIAGNOSED WITH POST-
TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER, OR
P.T.S.D.
>> I WAS WAKING UP IN THE MIDDLE
OF THE NIGHT SCREAMING, I WAS
PUNCHING THE WALLS, MY TEMPER
WAS FLYING OFF THE WALL, FOR NO
REASON, AND I'M NOT THAT WAY.
>> Reporter: IN THE PAST 15
YEARS, AS MANY AS ONE-FIFTH OF
WORLD TRADE CENTER RECOVERY
WORKERS, LIKE GEORGE-- CITY
EMPLOYEES, CONSTRUCTION WORKERS,
AND POLICE-- HAVE EXPERIENCED
THIS COMBINATION OF MENTAL AND
PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS.
DR. BENJAMIN LUFT HEADS THE
STONY BROOK WORLD TRADE CENTER
WELLNESS PROGRAM AND HAS BEEN
STUDYING THE INTERACTION BETWEEN
PHYSICAL AND MENTAL SYMPTOMS
AMONG RESPONDERS.
>> THIS WAS A VERY UNIQUE EVENT
IN THAT THE LEVEL OF TRAUMA THAT
WERE OCCURRING CONCURRENTLY IN-
THE MIND AND THE BODY THEY
OCCURRED AT THE SAME TIME IN THE
SAME PERSON.
>> Reporter: STONY BROOK
RESEARCHERS FOUND THAT
RESPONDERS WITH P.T.S.D.
SYMPTOMS ARE TWICE AS LIKELY TO
DEVELOP RESPIRATORY ISSUES.
AND ARE NEARLY THREE TIMES AS
LIKELY TO EXPERIENCE COGNITIVE
IMPAIRMENT COMPARED TO
RESPONDERS WITHOUT P.T.S.D.
IN A STUDY NOW UNDERWAY,
RESPONDERS FILLED OUT SURVEYS
EVERY FIVE HOURS FOR A WEEK
ABOUT THEIR P.T.S.D. SYMPTOMS
AND SUPPLIED BIOLOGICAL SAMPLES.
>> THEY WOULD PUT THIS IN
BETWEEN THEIR GUM AND THEIR
TOOTH THERE, AND COLLECT AS MUCH
SALIVA ON HERE AS POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: A GOAL OF THE
RESEARCH IS TO SEE HOW P.T.S.D.
MIGHT IMPACT OTHER PARTS OF THE
BODY.
>> SOME OF THESE THINGS, LIKE
CHRONIC STRESS, MAY CAUSE
CARDIAC DISEASE.
THERE'S SOME DATA TO SUGGEST IT
MAY EVEN POTENTIATE THE
DEVELOPMENT OF CANCERS.
IT'S NOT THAT THESE ARE IN YOUR
MIND, AS THEY SAY, IT'S THAT
THERE ARE ACTUAL BIOLOGICAL
MATERIALS THAT ARE BEING
PRODUCED, WHICH POTENTIATE A
WHOLE BUNCH OF PHYSICAL
PROBLEMS.
>> Reporter: N.I.O.S.H. HAS
FUNDED NEARLY $75 MILLION OF
RESEARCH ON THE HEALTH EFFECTS
OF THE W.T.C. ATTACKS SINCE
2010, INCLUDING THE RESEARCH AT
STONY BROOK.
N.I.O.S.H. RELIES ON RESEARCH TO
DETERMINE WHAT ILLNESSES SHOULD
BE COVERED BY THE W.T.C. HEALTH
PROGRAM.
>> TO MAKE THE LINK BETWEEN
EXPOSURE AND A HEALTH EFFECT IS
A VERY DIFFICULT THING.
WHEN THE CONGRESS PASSED THE
JAMES ZADROGA ACT THEY SAID
FIGURE OUT WHETHER THAT EXPOSURE
AGGRAVATED, CONTRIBUTED TO OR
CAUSED THAT PARTICULAR HEALTH
EFFECT SO THAT'S A BURDEN ON THE
PROGRAM.
>> Reporter: WHEN THE LAW WAS
ORIGINALLY PASSED, THE W.T.C.
HEALTH PROGRAM DESIGNATED ABOUT
TWO DOZEN ILLNESSES THAT WOULD
BE COVERED, INCLUDING ASTHMA,
SINUS INFECTIONS, AND P.T.S.D.
BUT NOT EVERY CONDITION MANY
FIRST RESPONDERS EXPERIENCE IS
ON THE LIST, LIKE NEUROPATHY, A
PAIN AND NUMBNESS IN THE HANDS
AND FEET.
JOHN COUGHLIN HAS THAT.
A VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER IN DEER
PARK ON LONG ISLAND, HE WAS A
NEW YORK CITY POLICE OFFICER ON
9/11 AND ASSISTED WITH SEARCH
AND RESCUE AT GROUND ZERO.
>> THIS IS OUR 9/11 MEMORIAL
OVER HERE.
>> Reporter: HE WORKED AT THE
SITE FREQUENTLY UNTIL HE RETIRED
FROM THE N.Y.P.D. IN 2002.
AT THE TIME, HE HAD A CLEAN BILL
OF HEALTH, BUT AS THE YEARS WENT
BY HE DEVELOPED RESPIRATORY
PROBLEMS, UNDERWENT OPEN HEART
SURGERY, AND STARTED TO
EXPERIENCE P.T.S.D.
>> I MAY LOOK GOOD ON THE
OUTSIDE, BUT INSIDE, ME
PERSONALLY, I'M LIKE A BROKEN
BOTTLE.
I JUST HIDE IT WELL.
>> Reporter: IN 2007, HE BEGAN
EXPERIENCING SYMPTOMS OF
NEUROPATHY.
>> YOUR FEET FEEL LIKE YOU'RE
WALKING IN SAND ALL THE TIME,
OKAY, AND FOR ME, FROM THE LOWER
KNEE DOWN TO MY FEET, AND MY
FINGERS, AND MY ARMS GET NUMB,
BUT MY FEET, THE WORST.
EVEN WALKING SOMETIMES IS
PAINFUL.
>> Reporter: DR. MARC
WILKENFELD, AN OCCUPATIONAL
PHYSICIAN AT WINTHROP UNIVERSITY
HOSPITAL IN NEW YORK, TREATS
PATIENTS FOR THE W.T.C. HEALTH
PROGRAM.
>> IF A PATIENT COMES TO SEE ME
IN MY OFFICE WITH NEUROPATHY, I
CAN'T TREAT IT UNDER THE
PROGRAM.
IT'S NOT COVERED BY THE
GOVERNMENT.
>> Reporter: IN THE LAST SEVERAL
YEARS, HE HAS STARTED TO NOTICE
MORE PATIENTS REPORTING
NEUROPATHY SYMPTOMS.
>> PEOPLE STARTED COMING IN, AND
THEY'D BE COMING FOR THEIR
ASTHMA, YOU KNOW, SOMETHING
THAT'S COVERED.
AND THEN A FEW TIMES SOMEONE
WOULD SAY TO ME AS AN
AFTERTHOUGHT, "OH BY THE WAY, I
GET THIS STRANGE TINGLING IN MY
FEET," OR, "I'M HAVING WEAKNESS
IN MY HANDS.
YOU THINK IT'S RELATED?"
>> Reporter: IN 2014, DR.
WILKENFELD DECIDED TO TEST HIS
HUNCH THAT NEUROPATHY MIGHT BE
RELATED TO THE TOXIC DUST AT
GROUND ZERO.
HIS FIRST STUDY LOOKED AT
EXPOSURE TO W.T.C. DUST IN RATS.
THEN, IN A STUDY BASED ON
SURVEYS OF FIRST RESPONDERS
PUBLISHED IN JANUARY, WILKENFELD
FOUND RESPONDERS WERE 15 TIMES
NEUROPATHY THAN NON-RESPONDERS.
DO YOU FEEL THAT YOU HAVE ENOUGH
EVIDENCE RIGHT NOW THAT DOES
PROVE THAT THERE'S A LINK?
>> WITHOUT QUESTION.
IF THERE'S A SMALL DOUBT, I
WOULD THINK YOU WOULD GIVE THESE
PEOPLE THE BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT.
>> Reporter: IN APRIL, THE
W.T.C. PROGRAM REJECTED A
PETITION TO COVER NEUROPATHY,
CRITICIZING WILKENFELD'S STUDY
OF RESPONDERS FOR HAVING "SELF-
REPORTED DATA" AND A "SMALL
SAMPLE SIZE."
>> A LOT OF PETITIONS THAT WE
GET THAT DON'T MAKE IT THE FIRST
ROUND, WE HOPE THAT WE'LL SEE
ADDITIONAL STUDIES.
SO WE HOPE THAT RESEARCHER WILL
THEN BE ABLE TO GIVE US A SECOND
STUDY, MAYBE INCLUDING A LARGER
NUMBER OF PEOPLE, MAYBE ANOTHER
RESEARCHER WILL BE ABLE TO
CORROBORATE.
SO I THINK IT'S A DIFFICULT
AREA, AND I THINK, HAVING SPOKEN
TO MANY, MANY RESPONDERS WHO
HAVE CONDITIONS THAT WE DO NOT
COVER, THIS IS A VERY DIFFICULT
THING.
>> Reporter: DR. WILKENFELD IS
WORKING ON FOLLOW-UP STUDIES,
BUT MEANWHILE FIRST RESPONDER
JOHN COUGHLIN WAITS.
>> I KNOW THERE'S A PROCEDURE
BUT PEOPLE ARE OUT THERE
SUFFERING, AND DEALING WITH
THESE ISSUES, AND THEY'RE NOT
GETTING THE TREATMENT THAT THEY
NEED, OR REQUIRE.
>> Reporter: SINCE 2011, THE
CONDITIONS COVERED BY W.T.C.
HEALTH PROGRAM HAVE EXPANDED,
INCLUDING PROSTATE AND DOZENS OF
OTHER KINDS OF CANCERS.
HOW CAN YOU BE SURE THAT A
RESPONDER'S CANCER IS LINKED TO
THEIR EXPOSURE AT THE WORLD
TRADE CENTER SITE?
>> WE CAN'T BE SURE.
SO WHAT WE LOOK FOR ARE SMALL
SIGNALS.
IS THIS PARTICULAR CANCER MORE
COMMON, IS THERE ANY KIND OF A
SIGNAL THAT IT'S MORE COMMON IN
OUR 9/11 EXPOSED POPULATION THAN
IT IS IN THE GENERAL POPULATION?
>> Reporter: FOR MICHAEL SHEA
AND HIS WIFE INGRID, HAVING
CANCER TREATMENT COVERED FOR
RESPONDERS IS A HUGE RELIEF.
LAST YEAR, SHEA WAS DIAGNOSED
WITH TERMINAL BRAIN CANCER.
A NASSAU COUNTY POLICE OFFICER,
HE HAD SPENT ABOUT 50 HOURS AT
GROUND ZERO HELPING SECURE THE
AREA IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE
ATTACK.
SO UP UNTIL THE POINT THOUGH
THAT YOU GOT CANCER, YOU WERE
PERFECTLY FINE AND HEALTHY?
>> YES.
NOTHING.
THIS IS THE ONLY TIME I EVER HAD
ANY TYPE OF MEDICAL CONDITION.
>> Reporter: AFTER MONTHS OF
CHEMOTHERAPY AND BRAIN SURGERY,
SHEA'S ABILITY TO WALK, TALK,
AND REMEMBER THINGS HAS
DIMINISHED.
>> NEXT ONE, YOUR FAVORITE.
>> ICE CREAM.
>> VERY GOOD!
>> Reporter: INGRID HAS BECOME
HIS PRIMARY CAREGIVER.
>> HOW DID HE GET IT FROM THE
WORLD TRADE CENTER?
WAS IT THE DUST, OR WAS IT
SOMETHING HE TOUCHED?
NOBODY KNOWS.
>> Reporter: DO YOU HAVE ANY
DOUBTS THAT HIS CANCER IS LINKED
TO THE WORLD TRADE CENTER?
>> I REALLY DON'T KNOW THE
ANSWER TO THAT, BUT THEY SAY IT
IS.
>> Reporter: SHEA IS NOW ONE OF
5,400 PEOPLE WHOSE CANCER
TREATMENT IS COVERED BY THE
W.T.C. HEALTH PROGRAM.
IT'S A LOT YOU'RE GOING THROUGH.
>> EVERY DAY.
IT'S ALL A JOB, TO MAKE HIS LIFE
EASIER.
HE'S MY PRIORITY.
RIGHT, BABY?
SEE MORE GROUND ZERO PHOTOS FROM
FIRST RESPONDER KEN GEORGE.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: NORTH KOREA IS
DISMISSING TALK OF TOUGHER
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS FOLLOWING ITS
FIFTH NUCLEAR BOMB TEST ON
FRIDAY.
IN A STATEMENT BROADCAST ON
STATE-RUN TELEVISION TODAY,
NORTH KOREA DENOUNCED THE U.S.
THREAT OF UNILATERAL ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS AS "MEANINGLESS" AND"
HIGHLY LAUGHABLE."
THE GOVERNMENT ALSO PLEDGED TO
CONTINUE ITS NUCLEAR WEAPONS
PROGRAM TO QUOTE, "ENSURE
GENUINE PEACE FROM THE
INCREASING THREAT OF A NUCLEAR
WAR BY THE UNITED STATES."
THE NUCLEAR TEST-- NORTH KOREA'S
MOST POWERFUL YET-- VIOLATED
UNITED NATIONS SANCTIONS, AND
THE U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL IS
PREPARING NEW ONES AFTER
CONDEMNING THE TEST FRIDAY.
ON THE EVE OF A PLANNED
NATIONWIDE CEASEFIRE IN SYRIA.
FIGHTING AND AIRSTRIKES
CONTINUED TODAY AS RIVAL SIDES
TRIED TO SECURE TERRITORIAL
GAINS AHEAD OF THE TRUCE.
AIRSTRIKES HIT THE CITY OF
IDLIB, IN NORTHERN SYRIA, WHERE
A HUMAN RIGHTS GROUP SAYS AT
LEAST 58 CIVILIANS WERE KILLED
YESTERDAY.
NEW CLASHES BETWEEN GOVERNMENT
TROOPS LOYAL TO PRESIDENT BASHAR
ASSAD AND REBELS ALSO WERE
REPORTED IN SYRIA'S LARGEST
CITY, ALEPPO, AND NEAR THE
CAPITAL, DAMASCUS.
IRAN, AN ALLY OF THE ASSAD
GOVERNMENT, SAYS IT WELCOMES THE
TRUCE BROKERED BY THE U-S AND
RUSSIA.
IF IT HOLDS, THE U-S AND RUSSIA
PLAN TO JOIN FORCES TO ATTACK"
ISLAMIC STATE" AND AL QAEDA
MILITANTS.
AT LEAST HALF A MILLION PEOPLE
HAVE DIED IN THE CIVIL WAR.. NOW
IN ITS SIXTH YEAR, AND ELEVEN
MILLION PEOPLE-- ABOUT HALF
SYRIA'S PRE-WAR POPULATION--
HAVE BEEN DISPLACED.
TURKEY CLAIMED TODAY ITS
WARPLANES KILLED AT LEAST 20
ISIS MILITANTS IN TARGETED AIR
RAIDS IN NORTHERN SYRIA.
THIS AS PRESIDENT RECEP ERDOGAN
SAID TURKEY HAS A, QUOTE,"
PRIMARY DUTY" TO DESTROY ISIS.
ERDOGAN ALSO VOWED TO, IN HIS
WORDS, "SAVE TURKEY FROM THE
SCOURGE" OF SEPARATIST KURDISH
MILITANTS HE LABELS TERRORISTS.
PROTESTERS CLASHED WITH POLICE
TODAY AFTER ERDOGAN FIRED
ELECTED MAYORS IN 28
MUNICIPALITIES CONTROLLED BY A
PRO-KURDISH OPPOSITION PARTY,
THE THIRD-LARGEST IN TURKEY'S
PARLIAMENT.
THE JUSTICE MINISTRY SAID MOST
OF THE FIRED MAYORS ARE
SUSPECTED OF HAVING LINKS TO
KURDISH SEPARATISTS.
ERDOGAN'S GOVERNMENT HAS FIRED
OR SUSPENDED MORE THAN 100-
THOUSAND OFFICIALS SINCE THIS
SUMMER'S FAILED MILITARY COUP.
NEARLY TWO MILLION MUSLIMS TODAY
COMPLETED THE ANNUAL HAJ
PILGRIMAGE.
THEY ASCENDED MOUNT ARAFAT, NEAR
MECCA, IN SAUDI ARABIA,
FULFILLING THE OBLIGATION OF
EVERY ABLE-BODIED MUSLIM TO TRY
TO MAKE THE PILGRIMAGE AT LEAST
ONCE IN HIS OR HER LIFETIME.
THE PILGRIMS SPEND THE DAY IN
PRAYER AT THE SITE WHERE THE
PROPHET MUHAMMAD IS BELIEVED TO
HAVE DELIVERED HIS FINAL SERMON
SOME 1,400 YEARS AGO.
DETERMINED TO AVOID ANOTHER
TRAGIC STAMPEDE LIKE LAST YEAR,
SAUDI OFFICIALS USED DRONES AND
OTHER SECURITY MEASURES TO
MONITOR THE RITUAL.
THE SAUDIS SAY AT LEAST 800
PILGRIMS DIED IN A CRUSH NEAR
MECCA IN 2015, BUT OTHER REPORTS
SAY THE DEATH TOLL WAS HIGHER.
WITH 57 DAYS UNTIL ELECTION DAY,
DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE HILLARY CLINTON
MAINTAINS A LEAD OVER REPUBLICAN
DONALD TRUMP IN MOST NATIONAL
OPINION POLLS.
AN "ABC NEWS-WASHINGTON POST"
POLL OUT THIS WEEKEND SHOWS
CLINTON FAVORED BY 46% OF LIKELY
VOTERS AND TRUMP, 41%.
STATEWIDE POLLS HAVE ALSO SHOWN
CLINTON WITH A SIGNIFICANT
ADVANTAGE IN THE ELECTORAL
COLLEGE MAP THAT DETERMINES WHO
WINS THE WHITE HOUSE.
BUT THIS ELECTION SEASON HAS
BEEN UNPREDICTABLE AND THERE ARE
MORE TO THESE POLLS THAN JUST
THE STATUS OF THE FRONTRUNNERS.
TO DIG A BIT DEEPER, WE ARE
JOINED BY "NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S"
JEFF GREENFIELD.
JEFF WE CAN GET CAUGHT UP IN THE
HORSERACE OF IT ALL BUT THERE'S
SOMETHING MORE TO TALK ABOUT IN
THESE POLLS.
>> TO ME, THE INTERESTING HIGH
NUMBER OF VOTERS WHO ARE
UNDECIDED THIS POINT OR LEANING
TOWARDS THIRD OR FOURTH PARTY
CANDIDATES, GARY JOHNSON OR JILL
STEIN.
I SUSPECT THIS IS BECAUSE THESE
ARE TWO HISTORICALLY UNPOPULAR
NOMINEES.
THE OTHER INTERESTING THING IS
YOU'D UNDERSTAND WHY JILL STEIN
WOULD BE TAKING AWAY VOTES FROM
HILLARY CLINTON, SHE'S ON THE
LEFT, AND GARY JOHNSON WOULD BE
DRAWING MORE FROM THE RIGHT BUT
IF YOU MATCH THESE NUMBERS UP HE
SEEMS TO BE MARGINALLY
HURTING HER MORE.
AGAIN, I CAN'T MATCH THESE
NUMBERS UP BUT THEY HAVE NOT
BEEN PERSUADED TO MOVE TO
HILLARY.
IN SOME STATES HE'S IN DOUBLE
DIGITS, IF HE GETS 15% HE GETS
INTO THE DEBATES.
>> THAT'S A GAME CHANGER RIGHT?
>> A PHRASE I'VE NEVER HEARD
BEFORE.
IT IS INDEED, THE ONE THING WE
KNOW ABOUT THIRD PARTY
CANDIDATES IS BOTH THE
PRESIDENTIAL ROSS PEROT, YOU PUT
AN INDEPENDENT CANDIDATE IN
THOSE DEBATES AND AUTOMATICALLY
HE STANDS AS A EQUAL TO MAJOR
PARTY CANDIDATES.
THAT'S THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
THING TO WATCH ABOUT THE THE
PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION HAS TO
FIGURE THIS OUT.
>> Stewart: WHAT DO YOU THINK
OF THE IMBALANCE, THE NUMBERS
THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN 6 TO 1 IN
SOME CASE HE WHAT THEY'RE
SPENDING, WHY IS THAT, WOULD
TRUMP EVER TRY MATCH THAT?
>> HE'S NOW IN THE POINT LAST
CYCLE LAST COUPLE OF WEEKS WHERE
HE'S ONLY DOWN 2 TO 1.
I'VE TALKED TO ANY NUMBER OF
PEOPLE, SAY HOW COME THAT
DISPARITY HASN'T SHOWN UP IN THE
POLLS?
THERE ARE ALL KINDS OF
EXPLANATIONS, ONE IS THAT FREE
MEDIA, WHAT PEOPLE SEE EVERY
NIGHT ON THE NEWS AND GET ON
THEIR DEVICES OVERWHELMS PAID
MEDIA.
SECOND, IT DID HAVE AN IMPACT IN
INCREASING TRUMP'S UNFAVORABLE
RATINGS.
SOME SAY CLINTON ISN'T POSITIVE
ENOUGH AND YOU KNOW WHAT, SOME
SAY WHAT IS SPENT ON PAID
ADVERTISING JUST MIGHT BE
WASTED.
IF WE HAVE IN THE PRIMARIES
TRUMP SPENT A TINY FRACTION OF
WHAT HIS OPPONENTS SPENT ON ADS
AND WON.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT THE ECONOMY,
LET'S ABOUT THE GDP, ARE THOSE
THINGS GOING TO BE THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING ULTIMATELY?
>> THERE IS A WHOLE COTTAGE
INDUSTRY IN ACADEMIA THAT SAYS
IF YOU AGREE ON THE RIGHT
NUMBERS, GROSS EPG DOMESTIC
PRODUCT, WHAT HAPPENS IN
UNEMPLOYMENT, THE INCUMBENT
PRESIDENT'S APPROVAL RATINGS,
THEY WILL TELL YOU MONTHS IN
ADVANCE THEY HAVE A PRETTY GOOD
IDEA WHO'S GOING TO WIN.
MOST OF THE TIME IF YOU GO BACK
AND LOOK THOSE PRE-ELECTION
FORECASTS HAVE LOOKED GOOD.
THE PROBLEM IS I'VE LOOKED AT
FIVE DIFFERENT FORECAST THAT TWO
OF WHICH SAYS THE DEMOCRATS WILL
WIN, TWO SAYS REPUBLICANS WILL
WIN, TWO SAYS I DON'T KNOW.
THE OTHER STUFF, ADS GET OUT THE
VOTES THE DATA ANALYTICS THAT WE
DID, THAT TRUMP DID NOT USE,
THAT CAN MATTER, AND STUFF THAT
DOESN'T MATTER THAT MUCH THAT WE
FOCUS ON THE GAFFS WHAT HAPPENS
IN A SPECIFIC DEBATE EVEN
SOMETHING LIKE TODAY'S HEALTH
EPISODE THAT INVOLVED HILLARY
CLINTON THAT HAS MARGINAL
IMPACT.
IN THE RACE WHERE THE
FUNDAMENTALS TELL YOU THIS IS
GOING TO BE A CLOSE ELECTION,
THEY MAY RELY ON MORE THAN IN
THE PAST.
>> JEFF GREENFIELD, THANK YOU
FOR BEING HERE.
>> NICE TO BE HERE.
>> Stewart: TOMORROW ON THE
NEWSHOUR, WE BEGIN A SPECIAL
WEEK-LONG SERIES EXPLORING THE
STATE OF HIGHER EDUCATION,
CALLED "RETHINKING COLLEGE."
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.